Proposal: browser.test API (#852)
hober/web-extensions: proposals/browser_test_api.md

# Proposal: browser.test API

**Summary**

Enable testing using the `browser.test` runner and assertion API.

**Document Metadata**

**Authors:** @kiaraarose and @zombie

**Sponsoring Browser:** Mozilla Firefox

**Created:** 2025-07-17

**Related Issues:** web-platform-tests/rfcs/pull/219

## Motivation

### Objective

This API provides utilities for writing and running tests for WebExtensions.
It includes assertion functions and a test harness to facilitate structured
and reliable testing.

#### Use Cases

The primary use case is testing WebExtensions implementations using
Web Platform Tests.  Secondary use case is enabling developers to
write and run a cross-browser test suite for their own extensions.

### Known Consumers

All browsers already have this API namespace, and the goal of specifying it

> here is to align existing implementations around common behaviors.

Reviewer: this is doing more than just specifying existing implementations / common behaviors; lots of this doesn't work in Chromium today.  That's okay (we've acknowledged there's work to be done here and this won't work out of the box), but I think it's worth highlighting that the intention of this proposal *is* to introduce behavioral changes in some browsers.

Author: Good point, I added a more explicit statement that this will require implementation changes.

## Specification

### Schema

**`browser.test.assertTrue(condition, message)`**

> Asserts that a given condition is `true`. If the condition is `false`, the test fails.

Reviewer 2: true or truthy?

Similarly below, false or falsey?

In Firefox, we treat them as truthy/falsey - we coerce the value to a boolean before comparing to true/false ([source](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/1838f847aa3bf909c3d34a94a8f0cd7e37fca086/toolkit/components/extensions/child/ext-test.js#192,195,288-294)).

In Chrome, the input must be a boolean (or even stranger - a string...!) - https://source.chromium.org/chromium/chromium/src/+/main:extensions/renderer/resources/test_custom_bindings.js;l=94-177;drc=abe36fd704986c2e4f54b4bd35c291d6beb0e28c

(this piece of feedback doesn't block landing this PR, but I felt that it was worth calling out the discrepancy between implementations.)

Reviewer 3: For Safari, our implementation aligns with Firefox.

Author: I'll leave it as explicitly `true`, since that's a common denominator, and we can start writing tests that manually coerce to boolean, which should work the same everywhere.  Separately we can discuss whether we want to align on `truthy` here or introduce a separate `test.assert` or `test.ok`.

    2.1) Only enumerable _own_ properties are considered, unordered.
3) Everything else is compared using `Object.is()` [same value algorithm](https://tc39.es/ecma262/#sec-samevalue).

We start with support for a minimal set of compound types and plan to expand to include
`ArrayBuffer`s, `Map`s, `Set`s, etc., in line with Node’s `assert.deepStrictEqual()`.

**Parameters**
- `actual` (any)
- `expected` (any)
- `message` (string, optional)

**`browser.test.assertThrows(fn, expectedError, message)`**
Asserts that a given function throws an error. If it does not, or if the thrown error doesn't
match `expectedError` (if defined), the test fails.

**Parameters**
- `fn` (function)
- `expectedError` (string | RegExp, optional)
- `message` (string, optional)

**`browser.test.runTests(tests)`**
Queues test functions to run sequentially and returns a promise that resolves or rejects based
on the outcome.

Each test function is treated as an individual test case. Tests run in order. When one completes,
the next begins. If a test fails (by throwing or rejecting), execution of that test stops and the
next one begins.

The promise:
- **Resolves** if all tests pass.
- **Rejects** if any fail.

> Tests pass when they return `undefined` or a resolved promise. They fail if they:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tests pass when they either return `undefined` or when a promise returned by the test resolves.  They fail if they:
```

- Throw an exception

> - Return a rejected promise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Return a promise that rejects
```

(or similar.  A returned promise may not be settled at the point it is returned)
